the way that philosophy is taught in
Western University classrooms gives
tremendous emphasis to the connection
between Karl Marx and Hegel so it's for
that reason that I have a brief video
here trying to bring that connection
down to earth try to put it on a more
reasonable footing or basis
the problem with Hegel is not so much
the legacy of textbooks he has left
behind to us but the attitude with which
people read and reinterpret them today
so to give an example in the philosophy
of history there's a really awkward and
fumbling and peculiar justification of
slavery you know okay
Hegel died in 1831 we just double-check
that yeah 1831 is it really such a big
deal that he offered this series of
bizarre philosophic excuses for slavery
it is what it is what's bizarre and
inexcusable is to hear modern Western
academic philosophy lecturers who are
themselves very often Marxist or
left-wing giving abstruse bizarre
rationalizations for why somehow this
set of excuses for slavery is profoundly
psychologically insightful or still true
today or we shouldn't judge him by bla
bla bla bla bla come on guys like the
legacy of Tex Hegel left to us should
not be taken seriously in that fashion
and excuses should not be made for them
if you read what Hegel says about India
if you read what Hegel says about China
it is absolute garbage even and
especially compared to the brilliant
research that was published during his
lifetime and that was published in
German he was alive during a time when
German awareness of Asia of Asian
Studies of Asian languages of Sanskrit
and Hinduism in India was blossoming
there were amazing breakthroughs in
European research those languages and
those historical traditions happening
and then you come to Hegel's philosophy
of history and what he has to say about
India and China
and dude it is laughably stupid its this
is just some know-nothing bumpkin who
somehow got himself a professorship of
philosophy passing judgment and making
erudite sound engrossed generalizations
that even in their own time were
laughably stupid and laughably ignorant
and give one other illustration of what
his attitude was early in philosophy of
history the same book by Hegel he makes
the pronouncement that he feels that all
of humanity should be united by the one
religion that is most ancient and most
original to mankind and and most
universal some his claim is that this is
Christianity and that its Lutheranism he
was a Lutheran but in some sense the
original and most ancient religion
that's going to unite all of mankind is
his Christianity
maybe it's an idealized version of
Lutheranism he has in mind like maybe
it's not the Lutheran Church as in
Germany yeah now again at that time it
was way past a proven fact that there
were religions in India and religions in
Central Asia that were much more ancient
than Christianity which he knew about a
religion like Buddhism and Hinduism and
so on but even leaving that aside within
his time the state of you know classical
scholarship within the Bible and with
ancient texts connected to and
contrasted the Bible there's a lot of
evidence even within Christian scripture
of what the pre-christian proto Jew
Judaism and earlier Judaism first temple
Judaism you really can get a pretty good
sense of the history of religion even
within that that kind of judeo-christian
scholarship that again at that time was
blossoming and sophisticated and he a
goal remains this kind of totally
uninitiated idiotic bumpkin outsider to
the progress of what's really going on
in philosophy theology even archeology
whether it's Asian Studies or within
or what-have-you and he's passing this
hottie judgment on the history of
civilization from his professors chair
in these peculiar lectures for for
teenagers well it is what it is it's a
relic of that time in that culture but
what he has to say about the history of
China of the history of India it cannot
be taken any more seriously than what he
had to say about the motion of planets
around the Sun which by the way he was
hilariously wrong about also so you know
um I've kind of loosen up about this in
what ways there was a time when I would
have made a video like this wanting to
really harshly condemn Hagel as one of
the worst authors and worst philosophers
in the history of the world but the
problem really is with our generation
and how we regard him there's something
very similar I would say with Immanuel
Kant and in some ways the problem is
similar with with Karl Marx so what is
the bridge from Hegel to Karl Marx
supposed to be it comes down to this
same text I've already mentioned
repeatedly Hegel's philosophy of history
he has some remarks in there about the
concept of an historical class and of a
universal class in history and if you've
read a little bit of Marx or you saw my
earlier video bookmarks you know that
Marx uses similar terms when talking
about the industrial working class
becoming a universal class or becoming
the leading class in history this kind
of idea so there's a similarity on the
surface there now I'm not really talking
about the young Marx there's probably an
argue to mate if you go back to the
earliest available writings in Marx that
there's some more influenced or Hegel
that can be talked about I still don't
think it's it's terribly profound but
we're talking about basically the mature
adult Marx Marx's idea of social class
is much more powerfully connected to the
study of antiquity classical scholarship
in ancient Rome and ancient Athens and
then it's also powerfully influenced by
the research that was coming back from
the British Empire in India okay never
forget European Europe
imperialism in India predates European
imperialism in North America now not by
a longshot but in 1492 there already
were Portuguese colonies in India you
had the beginning of this incredibly
brutal cycle of piece-by-piece India
coming under European domination in
detail and of course India the history
of India held up a fascinating mirror to
the history of Europe and India was
discussed it was mentioned in ancient
Greek in ancient Roman texts there was
some awareness of India in antiquity so
now Europe was kind of rediscovering
India and was rediscovering an era when
they were less less Christian that they
didn't have to just understand India in
terms of you know demon worship or
something not in terms of a strictly
Dark Ages view of India and of course
they start to appreciate that India
didn't really have a slave system as
Europeans did at that time
European was it your Europe was becoming
a globe spanning slave trading empire as
you may know um but they had this caste
system that a system of social classes
so call Marx as a mature writer he's
influenced by the study of ancient
Greece and Rome and then he's influenced
by his fascination he had a really deep
fascination with everything he could get
his hands on describing the social class
system in India that was being
discovered and analyzed by the British
partly because the British were
conquering bits and pieces of India and
never forget the British were in complex
power sharing arrangements and alliances
than India also it wasn't the case that
the British just wiped India clean or
something you know principality by
principality the British had to make
accommodations with you know including
local mercenaries who fought for the
British and local royal families that
said okay we'll support the British you
fight against the province next door to
us these kinds of petty local rival
rivalries were very much part of the
British divide and rule strategy it
wasn't the case that England ever just
conquered India as a continent on the
whole it controlled a patch war
of smaller states comprising the grander
enterprise of the the colonization of
India all right so that African said
Karl Marx is a guy influenced by all of
those things as a mature author much
more than influenced by Hegel's theory
of social class of historical class of
quote unquote universal classes
so what was it Hegel said and what's
what's the contrast that matters here
well what Hegel really says is less
about history than it is about the
writing of history is what he says is at
different periods of time there's a
different class that is the historical
class that is the only class history is
written about so you have long periods
of aristocracy where the historical
records the books are just about the
aristocrats you have periods of society
where one man dominates society so much
one ruler one monarch that the history
is really just written about that one
man and his family whether he's a king
or a tyrant or what-have-you and you
know of course the contrast in
everyone's mind including Hegel's mine
is the legacy of ancient Greek writing
writing from you know Athens and to a
lesser extent Rome where you really have
this participatory and somewhat
democratic form of government where the
political class being written about
really involves decision-making and
participation and debate that you know a
much larger part of society participated
in not the slaves as you know women had
a limited participation and so on but of
course that was a striking contrast to
the way history was written in
aristocrat a period someone now am I
suggesting to you that Hegel writes
about this in a down-to-earth reasonable
way no Hegel is a very pretentious
over-the-top
bombastic writer and sure he makes it
sound as if he's stating something
transcendental and profound and
metaphysical so on and so forth and it's
it's really not is really nothing of the
kind there
be debated or discussed what it comes
down to is when he's talking about in
different periods of history different
social classes are the universal class
or the historical class that would
dominate society there's no further to
go with his observation because it's
fundamentally about the writing of
history the recollection of history it's
not about what actually unfolds
historically I mean he's not claiming
that the soldiers in the army didn't
matter that only the commander mattered
obviously that would be an absurdity
it's not even a claim that in that sense
the slaves don't matter or the lowest
and most oppressed people in society so
you know is that really what's important
to crawl Marx when Marx develops this
notion comes out of very very strongly
out of Rome and Athens that it from
Marxist perspective at different periods
of time different social classes compete
to take over the control of the
government and his feeling is that with
different quote-unquote modes of
production with different economic be
seized for their supremacy one period of
history after another naturally tends to
one form of government after another
under the Dominion of one social class
or another and you could say his gambit
his prediction his you know his theory
really in the sense of hypothesis was
that he was living through a period of
time in which the working-class
specifically the industrial working
class would take over the leadership and
domination of society from the
bourgeoisie now one of the problems with
this model of course is that it is
fundamentally kind of static in the
sense that you know the government of
Rome or we can even say the government
of the Roman Empire doesn't really
change that much from one revolution to
the next Li don't forget revolution was
not a force invented by by communists
right you talk about revolutions in the
history of Rome and some of those
revolutions were brought
by slave revolts a few some of them were
brought about by one kind of
middle-class fighting against the
aristocrats fight against the patricians
of the upper bust that happened
repeatedly in history from many other
revolutions were just infighting within
the elite one group of aristocrats but
he gets another and so on but
fundamentally the structure and nature
of authority of the Roman Empire and of
the city of Rome itself remains pretty
much unchanged from one period emetics
now this is actually something Carl Marx
and and Hegel have in common
what's the big example they both were
living in the shadow of Napoleon right
so what happened in France during the
period of the French Revolution and then
the directory or the Directorate you
know kind of more corrupt less
idealistic period the French Revolution
and then that falls away and you have
Napoleon taking over you have various
stages of France kind of sort of having
elected government after the Revolution
and then kind of giving up on that
illusion and Napoleon taking over and
there's by the way is a series of
revolutions within that French
Revolutionary period it's not just one
revolution and when you look at that
history that again Hegel very much lived
through and Karl Marx was obsessed with
in retrospect but it was it was fresh
retrospect it wasn't ancient history for
Karl Marx what you see in the analysis
of the French Revolution and breakdown
in the French Revolution then napoleon
taking over it's very much stage by
stage that history can be summarized as
class struggle as class warfare but
again it's a very kind of static notion
of what government is government has
already existed under the kings of
france before the first phase the french
revolution if you like government is
taken over and operated by a different
group of people after one revolution and
then you have a sequence of struggles
where different regime
very clearly backed by different social
classes even within Paris fight and
exterminate each other incredible
brutality in a manner quite similar to
what we have in the historical record
definitely from ancient Rome so II mean
it's not democratic in the sense of a
vote and then government changing hands
no not at all you have a period of time
when the jacobins rise up and then the
Liberals it's a liberal here meaning the
moderate left the Liberals
exterminate the jacobins hunt them down
and kill them so they both the far left
is suppressed by the Liberals and
there's a very clear difference of
social class between them who represents
the poor and who represents the wealthy
but liberal and then you have another
period where again this is old French
Revolution retirement here where the the
Liberals are fighting against the real
Royalists conservatives so those are
people who are wealthy and are to some
extent aristocrats or they're just
conservative both the people who still
liked the monarchy and wanted to go back
more to that kind of system and again
the exterminate other it's absolutely
mmm is it says brutal as the revolutions
in in ancient Rome on the streets of
Paris the body counts are not that high
compared to the 20th century it's not
like Adolf Hitler mastering people on
that scale it's a few thousand people
dying here and a few thousand people
dying there but its persecution that
involves you know going to people's
houses murdering civilians like dragging
them out of their homes to be
decapitated with the guillotine the
brutality and the kind of face to face
hands-on nature of that of that violence
it casts a huge shadow over the city of
Paris and city by city and the rest of
France it's a patchwork in some cities
extremely brutal violence some cities
not so much some were spared that amount
of violence when you get down to that
that level so you have a sequence of
revolutions in France
none of them sincerely Democratic none
of them producing or ruled by are guided
by elections elections play a background
role in
in the French Revolution but you know
Assyrians are interested to finish the
sequence what's really the final stage
of radicalism in the French village the
last gasp of the left-wing as you go
through this series of back and forth
class antagonisms class struggles the
last phase is what's called the society
of equals also referred to in English as
the conspiracy of equals alright and
today what most historians say is they
were the first socialists in our sense
of socialists and they were partly
produced by the violence of already
mentioned like well the Jacobins had
already been exterminated and suppressed
and the sequence of back and forth
suppressions persecutions of the
Conservatives and the far left by the
the moderate liberals in the middle but
it's impossible to call the moderates
because they were murderous power Mars
and what's produced by this is a
genuinely new form of radicalism that
says that they reject you know the
existence of the aristocracy but they
also reject the rule of these
middle-class bourgeois liberals that
their objective is to replace that with
a society of equals
okay so organically and authentically
within the context of the French
Revolution Karl Marx found this
inspiring symbolic touchstone that in
many ways she just appropriated and
germanized and formalized and presented
as his own philosophy and he presented
it not just as an analysis of the past
but as his projections for the future as
what he saw coming in the future and of
course that's a ridiculous methodology
right I can't I can't present you with
my analysis of what happened during the
Great Depression of say World War one
Great Depression will do and then say ok
and now here's what I'm seeing this is
what's gonna happen in the next 50 years
it's just a glance if anything you can
say well that won't
and again because that already happened
once history is not gonna repeat itself
but you know obviously Marx found that
tremendously inspirational and and that
is if you like the underlying
sentimentality beneath some of the
seemingly Hegelian jargon about social
class and throat Marx's work he's
obsessing over the French Revolution and
as he's already well known as we mention
on this channel his analysis of Louie
Napoleon this is normally called
Napoleon the third Louie Napoleon who's
not the original Napoleon
you know his analysis of that is
constantly presenting parallelisms
claiming that history is repeating
itself that there was the French
Revolution before and then there's this
other French Revolution there was a
Napoleon Bonaparte before we have
another guy who's kind of sort of like
Napoleon Bonaparte now you know he does
that partly just as a provocative
literary device but partly that just
really is the way he sees history and
politics and again I mean if you don't
if you don't take it too seriously kind
of so what I mean you can just look at
this guy Marx and say well you know what
Karl Marx was not an expert in the
history of China
he's not an expert in the history of
India he wasn't an expert in the history
of France he wasn't expert in the
history of Rome or Greece or anything
else he was definitely not an expert on
the science of economics he dabbled in
all these things he got books off the
leverage of he read very widely and I
have to give him credit for that he
continued to be inspired by by new ideas
and he came up with this kind of air SAS
political philosophy that some people
found inspirational and took way too
seriously where people pretended that
his analysis was a large part analysis
the French Revolution really did reveal
something about the mechanics of history
that a predictive power for the next
revolution and you know long story short
what he said was during the French
Revolution before the first French
Revolution oh the one that ends with
Napoleon the problem was he felt the
industrial working class
hadn't developed yet such that this
poorer class could really take over the
government
the problem was the French Revolution
moved forward and forward you have the
emergence of as I say socialism under
the conspiracy of equals but ultimately
that was a period where the bourgeois
class still dominated society where
counter-revolution they couldn't get
past counter-revolution both of the
bourgeois liberals and of course also
ultimately Frances dragged back to
monarchy of one kind after another that
France regresses after the Revolution
brought them closer and closer to this
progress so you know this ends up being
a kind of flattering video I'm
completely anti-marxist don't get me
wrong but the sense in which I can
sympathize with Karl Marx's intellectual
direction here is precisely that I see
it didn't evolve out of Hegel it's
really a bad way to teach Marx and as
presented is evolving it of Hegel it
evolved out of an analysis of the French
Revolution and again very much in the
shadow of Europe's obsession with Greece
in Rome and Marx was correct that
democracy and voting and Parliament's
don't really explain very well what
happened the sequence of events in the
French Revolution instead tragically you
have a kind of phony farce of these
elections and by the way in most of
those elections the liberal so-called
Democrats from whatever the Liberals who
are controlling the government they
would allow far fewer than 10% of people
to vote they basically only allowed
people to vote who supported their
government and they were carrying out
violent brutal suppression of anyone who
disagreed with them so there was some
voting but it's really tragic I mean it
really really was a kind of dictatorship
you know with a with a fig leaf of
symbolic democracy that's what the
French Revolution degenerated into and
again they didn't just persecute the
right in the royalist and conservative
they were also persecuting the left
very very brutally these these ports
were liberals so
you know the sense in which I can
sympathize with Marx is he was obsessed
with the issue the French Revolution and
he was broadly speaking correct that
when you look at that history what you
were looking at is a history of class
struggle a history of class warfare a
history of one social class after
another trying to exterminate the other
at least just within Paris on a kind of
small local scale struggling to
physically take over the government and
within that short timespan the nature of
government itself as I say remains
static it's still if you like the king's
throne and it's just a question of who's
gonna sit on that throne in the same way
that within one period of time in the
Roman Empire you can see you know one
social class throwing its to another for
who's gonna who's gonna control the
throne and we're not really looking at
profound reforms to to government itself
so I think with that summary you can
also guess the way in which I profoundly
disagree with Marx's whole direction
what you really need to examine in the
history of Rome and in history of France
is the way in which the throne itself
changes the meaning of government
changes the meaning of the military
changes you know like these things
actually do transform during the
lifetime of Napoleon during the lifetime
of of Hegel also the way you know
actually you need to give a very simple
example at the beginning of that period
of time military service is associated
with punishment for a crime people are
recruited you know by brute force and
force in the military service and you
know they're offered military service
instead of a death sentence this kind of
thing they're regarded as the dregs of
society and the higher orders of the
military are all established by birth by
being an aristocrat and so on and by the
end of that time say by the time
Napoleon dies the idea of the military
being an elite form of upward social
mobility where promotion is based on
merit not based on aristocratic rank or
birth that that if it's a citizens duty
to serve the country through the
military again ideas that are now with
us today
the transformation of from a kind of
dark ages idea of the military into a
modern idea of the professional military
attached to ideas of nationalism and yet
democracy ultimately it's a kind of more
democratic ideal of military service so
yeah you have the seen the same
vocabulary is being used for the army
but what is meant by those terms has
profoundly changed and in the same way I
mean it doesn't happen overnight but in
that period of time the nature of
government the nature of public service
itself the responsibilities of the
government the functions of the
government they're completely
transformed within say 50 years
step-by-step gradually and much of it
unplanned and unintentional but you know
someone who lived through those 50 years
they would be able to say you know what
we mean by government before the French
Revolution is profoundly utterly
different from what government does now
how it functions and so on some decades
after the French Revolution had wound
down after the atrocities had
so-to-speak been been forgotten so you
know yes the elements of class struggle
came and went but if you think about
government as a public service
bureaucracy it was completely
transformed often unintentionally if you
think of government as being democratic
at least partly at least imperfectly at
least in principle than for the whole
world including even like England
England which was a an enemy of France
then in exactly that period of time the
fundamental assumptions about elections
and the role of government they changed
for everyone and and by the way of
course that's not just because of France
the rise and fall of the French
Revolution also there's this little
country you might have heard of called
the United States of America
so that also becomes a symbol of what
Democratic electoral government you know
could be so Marx is looking at that
history and very fundamentally he is
drawing the
conclusions and is there a meaningful
connection to the kind of aimless
meandering self-indulgent reflections of
Hegel in Hegel's philosophy of history
not one that's worth talking about